So we've now gotten up to 11 dash context.
So if you need to check it out,
that's where we are.
And we are going into the last section of
the Complete Intro to React,
which is portals and refs.
Another kind of advanced use case.
Okay, question for you.
I have my lovely puppy here,
which you cannot adopt, by the way.
But say you wanted to, and
you click the Adopt Luna button.
And we wanted to do the age old,
wonderful user experience of a modal,
cuz everybody loves modals.
No I'm just kidding,
modals are terrible and
we should all stop using them, but
I'm gonna show you how to do it.
If you're not familiar with what
a modal is, it's like a popover thing.
It's a confirmation thing or
a dialogue kinda thing.
It's a popover,
you can think about it as that.
And they're awful user experiences.
Every user study I've ever done,
basically everyone says I hate modals,
don't show me modals.
And what do we do as developers?
We show them more modals.
It's just lazy design, to be honest.
So let's do some lazy design.
So how would you do that right now?
Just think through your React
tools that you've learned so far.
Think about, I need to do a modal,
how would I architect that?
It's not a super-easy
thing to solve with React.
So, all right, I'm inside of details.
Someone clicks this button right here,
right?
I need to show something that covers
everything on the screen, right?
It's gonna cover the header.
It's gonna cover the background.
How am I gonna do that?
Cuz if I just try and put it here,
right show my modal component.
It's probably not gonna cover
the other things, right?
Or I have to write my CSS in a very
specific way that this can overwrite
everything.
If you have position relative or
position absolute on anything above
it it's gonna mess it up, right?
So how am I going to cover it?
It'd be way easier if I could just
do it on the outside of everything.
And in theory you could kind of do that.
Basically what you would do is all right,
I have a prop called show modal function
that I would invoke from here that
would invoke something in app.
And then here in app,
at the outermost layer,
I could do a modal component
that covers everything, right?
And just do this pass up,
pass down of functions and properties.
That sounds annoying, doesn't it?
It is, and honestly this is
the way that we used to do it.
I feel like when I teach this
class I'm like, back in my day,
we used to walk uphill
both ways in the snow.
And we couldn't show modals [LAUGH].
So there's a thing now called portals
that just make it tons easier to do.
So I'm gonna show you how to make
a modal or a portal in React.
So the first thing is we're gonna go
back and modify index.html here, okay?
We're gonna put a div
above it called modal.
And don't put anything inside of there
otherwise it's gonna get displayed.
Now we're going to create a React
component that only renders into this one,
right?
And then, now it's above our application
entirely and we can do whatever we want.
Now I'm showing you how to do this with
a modal but you can use portals for
lots of things, right?
Let's say that we had some sort
of contextual navigations,
my favorite use case for it, right?
Let's say that I'm on this page and
I show an adopt button, and
I show a go back to home button,
and I show see my next pet button.
And then I click the homepage and
this is show only pets, or show only dogs,
shows only cats.
It's like contextual to the page
that you're navigating but
it's on a separate part of the page,
right?
That'd be another good use for portals,
I'm doing something here that
affects state over here.
So if I can use a portal from here to
render into a different spot on the page.
It makes my code very succinct and
work together well,
and the like things are grouped together.
And I don't have to have this crazy
messaging system back and forth.
Before, we would've just done that
with something like context or Redux,
where we would just have some sort of
shared application state that's passing
it across.
That would've worked okay,
it just would've been annoying.
And portals make it very easy.
So, I want you to make
a new file called modal.js.
Or you can call like the devil.js
if you really wanna be accurate.
You can see I'm a big fan of modals,
[LAUGH] Import,
we don't need React,
we just need use effect.
And use ref.
So we're gonna use another special
case hook here called ref from React.
Okay, and then we're gonna import
a create portal method from react-dom.
Since this is interacting directly with
the dom that comes from react-dom and
not from react.
Okay, we're gonna make this modal
function, it's gonna take in children.
Then it's gonna render out some stuff.
Const modal=, rather.
And then we're gonna say const elRef.
So el stands for element,
you could totally put element Ref here.
I've written element so
many times I just put el now.
= useRef, and then we're gonna
give it null to begin with.
So what is a ref?
A ref is something like I have one value
that I need to refer to the exact same
thing across all renders.
Whereas with like use state you get the
current state which you can blow away and
recreate.
Different renderings have access to
different versions of the same state.
With ref, you're saying
across all of this rendering,
I wanna refer to exactly the same thing.
Precisely the same thing as in like
a triple like const x = x, right?
I want triple equality of,
let's say like this, const y,
So x is not triple equal to y, right?
Because they do not reference
to the exact same object.
They're equivalent in the sense
that they are both empty objects.
But they're not the same object, right?
When you're using something for elRef,
you want something that's gonna be
triple equal to the same thing.
So if I have like for example const
z equals x, z is triple equal to x.
So we want this kind of
equality across renders.
I'm abstract at the moment,
I know, but give me a second and
I'll explain to you why this is important.
But that's what useRef is for, so
that you make sure that you're getting the
exact same thing in every single render.
The reason why we want that is so
that if elRef.current,
it gives you back this
container that allows you to
set this to have the same
thing across all renders.
Oops, and now I can say elRef.current
is assigned document.createElement("div").
Now I have this div container that I'm
going to render inside of my portal.
And later when I go to destroy it, I'm
going to destroy the one that I created.
Otherwise, you're going to get a different
div, which is not going to destroy the one
that you have and you're going to end up
with a memory leak, which you don't want.
Okay, you can get rid of all that.
If this is weird to you, ths stuff here,
there's great Frontend Masters courses
on objects and object equalities and
coercion and all that kind of stuff.
That's what all this has to do with.
Okay, so now we have this elRef.current.
By the way, elRef is a frozen object.
It's a mutable ref object if you
wanna know what the type is.
And it only has one thing that
you can set, which is current.
If you try and
say like elRef.lol = wat, right?
You actually can't do this,
it won't let you, it's a frozen object.
It only lets you modify current.
So it can keep that referential equality,
that's why it does that.
UseEffect, Okay, so if this gets rendered.
Sorry, when this very first gets rendered,
we need to render into that
portal spot on the dom.
So we're gonna say const modalRoot is
assigned document.getElementById modal.
So we're gonna get a hold of that modal.
Then we're gonna say
modalRoot.appendChild ElRef.current.
And then down here, we're gonna say
only do this at the first render, right?
We don't wanna render into
it every single time.
We just wanna start that rendering
process and then go from there.
Okay, now here's a problem that
we have with this component.
We're creating this div here and
if we don't destroy it, or
specifically, yeah if we
don't remove this afterwards,
because we're doing this like
apend child business, right?
We're gonna leak right,
cuz it's going to keep appending children,
it's never going to remove.
React doesn't remove it for us.
So we have to tell React,
when this gets destroyed,
or on component will unmount, right,
would be the equivalent lifecycle method.
We need to tell it destroy this div.
The way you do it, and
it's kind of strange,
is you return a function
here in useEffect.
So we're going to return a function,
this function will get invoked
whenever this model goes away.
It's a little weird but
that's how you do this.
And then you just say
modalRoot.removeChild (elRef.current).
This is clean up, whatever you
return in useEffect is for cleanup.
It's almost always for memory leaks.
I've never used it for
anything but stopping timers,
removing stuff from the dom,
stopping the libraries from running.
If you ever have to integrate with
something like jQuery from React, one,
I'm sorry for your loss, and two,
you would do it here, right?
This is where that's useful for, okay?
And then finally,
we can say return createPortal,
Div children,
And then we just tell it where to put it,
which is elRef.current.
And then down here at the bottom,
export default modal.
All right, some crazy stuff
happening in there, I know, right?
But this is how you end up
having to work with modals.
And honestly,
you can just kind of like rip this modal
code and apply it to other places.
This is more or less what a modal
is always going to look like.
Unless you have some styling or
something you wanna put around it.
You could do that here as well if you had
like some particular subset of features.
Like how to remove it, those sorts
of things, you could put that here.